Explaining Combat Stress аnd its Effects on Decision Making in the Theatre of Operation

Abstract
Combat stress and decision-making process in dynamic contexts are almost unexplored and still incompletely clear
to the scientific community. On the other side, both are some key aspects of combat performance. Operational
psychology is focused on using psychological knowledge in enhancing operational performance. First is necessary to
understand their nature and relationship, in the direction of making strategies for training and dealing. Stress is
productive when is optimal, while decision making process has its specifics in dynamic and risk contexts. Stress has
an impact on decision making process, but their relationship is still unclear, as well as whether they can be seen as a
related concept or separate phenomena. However, both are based on certain psychological processes, whose
understanding and impact can lead to necessary changes in performance as a human behavior, and whose are base
for mental readiness training programs. It is recommended to include these programs within the basic military
training, to enhance military performance.
Keywords: Combat stress; Operational performance; Decision-making; Military psychology.
INTRODUCTION
Operational psychology is a relatively new area of psychology that deals with the
“operational” side of military and law enforcement, focused on the psychological
information that is relevant for these specific populations, within their similarities.
Psychology as a scientific area deals with human behavior, its explanation and
prediction, while psychological applied branches’ main goal is to find ways of human
behavior changing in accordance with the needs of the society, groups, and
organizations in it. Military and law enforcement, especially with high demand, high
reliability, and risk professions within them, are dealing with high-risk social goals and
using expensive equipment, that needs expensive training and personnel readiness. All
this confirms the need of investment and special care of personnel, that implies
enhancing of their professional knowledge as well as their mental health and expiration 
Aleksandra Dimitrovska
Explaining Combat Stress аnd its Effects on Decision Making …
6  , VOL. 12, ISSUE 2 – JUNE 2024, PP. 5-19
date extension, which is unimaginable without implementing relevant psychological
principles, practices, and research.
According to that, the main idea of this text is making an overview of some current
knowledge about two crucial aspects for understanding human behavior, towards
enhancing combat performance. Given the distance between laboratory and field,
research on this subject is rare and literature is limited. So, presenting some information
about nature and relationships will open discussions about possibilities of
neutralization some negative impact, to consider some steps toward maximizing the
positive effects in combat.
An attempt to explain combat situations is facing with the dynamic interpretation of the
human behavior complexity in groups under unpredictable environment and stress.
Stress has its impact on the psychological and physiological function that affects human
behavior and the performance on the field, which has special implications in the case of
leaders. One aspect of the field performance is decision making, as a psychological
process that determines the whole behavior and has its impact on the situation in
dynamic circumstances, as well as psychological processes and behavior of the other
team members. It suggests the need for a multi-variable, complex and interactive model
that can explain generation and coping with stress in combat, the way of its impact on
the decision-making process, and the ways of its prevention and management.
What is stress?
There is no scientific consensus about the definition of stress, nor does there exist an
official theory for reliable prediction of human reactions in the special conditions of
environmental stress, especially in combat. In military psychology literature research is
mostly focused on detecting modern military stressors or explaining relations of combat
stress with other variables during different kinds of military training. When the
definition of stress is discussed, mainly is presented Sally’ (1976) pioneer endocrinological
approach of stress as external stimulus or psycho-biological response, vs. recently most
accepted Lazarus’ transactional approach, by which stress has psychological nature and is
viewed as a relationship (transaction) between individuals and their environment. He
distinguishes the source of stress or stressors, as external event or internal request, from
stress (harm, threat or challenge), as internal state or experience that comes from two
mediating processes: cognitive appraisal of personal significance of the specific event
(primary appraisal - interpretation of the situation) and coping strategies used by the
individual to cope (secondary appraisal - interpretation of the coping possibilities).
Coping, determined as personality’ efforts to manage demands, conflicts and pressures,
that outperform person’ resources, has been studied extensively, but researchers
haven’t reached a consensus about its nature yet. Opposed to coping as personality trait
 
7
which guides to enhancing that trait for adapting to stressful situation, is approach of
coping as a response caused by a match between traits and specific stressful situation that guide
to enhancing some traits (eg. performance-related) in specific situations (eg.
performance-related stressful situation). Thereby, coping strategies can be generally
(Lazarus & Folkman, 1984):
1. Problem/ task-oriented - focused on task goal accomplishing and minimizing or
modifying the stressors,
2. Emotion-oriented - alleviation or elimination of the emotion’s consequence of a
stressor, not on a stressor from the situation, that are effective for stressors that are
uncontrolled and brief, but less for combat stressors, and
3. Avoidant focused – diverting attention from the stressful situation.
In the military case, occupational stress can be organizational, operational, and combat.
While operational stress refers to operational environment and operational tempo, not
directly associated with combat (hard training, rules, friends in danger), combat stress
refers to the extent of stressors (physical, environmental, cognitive, and emotional)
present in the combat environment. According to intensity, unpredictability, and risk,
most like combat stress is acute stress in crises. On the other side, organizational stress
is related with military organization, organizational structure, and life, which is mostly
of chronic nature (and is not a focus of this work). Stress and stressors defer from the
combat/ operational stress response/ injury, that refers to reactions (physical,
behavioral, and social) experienced during or after a combat deployment and other
stressors, that are descriptions of normal human reactions to extraordinary events, but
which can finish with PTSD, as a kind of psychological diagnosis.
Thereby, it is important to make difference between causes (stressors) that can be
enduring or cumulative (ex. fatigue or boredom) or acute (ex. threat) and stress symptoms
or outcomes of stress, that can be long-term (PTSD) and short-term, as well as between
mental health and performance outcome. Thus, in the military, especially Special Forces
and missions, the biggest accent is placed on prevention strategy, where education,
training and social support have been proved as most effective approaches. Most
important aim in it is improving stress tolerance, as capability to stay cool or not let
emotional and physiological reaction to interfere with the cognitive processing, which is
harder in acute crisis situation, characterized as with a sudden change in the situation
with a loss of resources for the individual (Gaillard, 2003). 
Aleksandra Dimitrovska
Explaining Combat Stress аnd its Effects on Decision Making …
8  , VOL. 12, ISSUE 2 – JUNE 2024, PP. 5-19
It is important to emphasize that the “modern war” operations vary between highintensity combat, peacekeeping, and stability operations, to humanitarian or nationbuilding projects. So, they include a wide range of stressors, related to extreme stress
exposure in combat up to capabilities of successful coping with shifting challenges of
war and peace building. All this suggests the need for different training approaches. In
extensive study, Barton distinguishes six primary stress dimensions: isolation,
ambiguity, powerlessness, boredom, danger, and workload (Bartone, 2006). Given that
all members are vulnerable to insurgent attack, and it is considered the most extreme
war theatre, the text is focused on explaining combat stress and factors related with its
existence.
Models of combat stress
To emphasize an appropriate model, it was shown that there are studies that outlined
variables related to combat stress, but a coherent scheme of their relations lacks its face
validity. It is almost impossible to conduct research and confirm some theories and
hypothesis out of the real combat situation, so hence existing models are based on war
experience of some combat leaders. Gal and Jones’ model (1995) includes number of
antecedent variables that are acting through mediating variables (even without clear-cut
distinction between them) in affecting individual appraisal of the combat situation, and
result in modes of response and coping with the real combat situation. Antecedent
variables are in the background of the combat situation and can be:
1. Individual factors: personality dispositions as long-standing factors (limited evidence,
but tendency is toward considering traits for selection for combat roles, leadership roles
and special operation), individual’s well-being refers to the relationship with the
environment (positively related with ability to face with stress), previous combat
experience (enhancing, against fear, or inhibiting effect, if it was traumatic), role in combat
(formal - leadership role is less stressful, or assumed – expectations, mastery and
concentration to tasks distract attention from danger; both have crucial role in
appraisal).
2. Unit factors that determinate unit climate: unit cohesion and morale (law level of moral
and weak bonds with comrades and leader positive relate with loneliness and low selfesteem, that concern military performance and intense perceived stress in combat),
confidence in commanders (essential and critical role in coping with stress in combat,
especially believe in professional competence, than believe in credibility and perception
of care; confidence is linear with the command level before battle, but it trend is
reversed after combat), confidence as a soldier (confidence in skills and weapon increase
battle skills, that improves with training, especially simulations), ideology, values and 
 
9
commitment (believes of homeland defending give additional strength, but the solidarity
with soldiers next, is main maintainer of survival in the battlefield), and
3. Battlefield factors: type of battle (stress is higher in static than in mobile situation,
higher in defensive than offensive operations, no clear data for day or nighttime), length
of exposure (correlate with cumulative stress, so consequences are combat exhaustion
and fatigue, and there is a limit to breakdown) and intensity of combat (correlate with
acute stress with consequence of battle shock), battle anticipation (may be more stressful
than acute battle, named as “pre-combat syndrome”, the relationship is inverted U with
positive feeling of combat, as a result of two conflict tendencies – relaxation and
excitation – fused in “incubation of threat”), uncertainty (temporal – when the time is
unknown, and event – when the nature of event is unknown, both are positively related
with stress) and surprise (mostly surprise aversive event, that maximize panic and
breakdown), and environmental conditions (new and unfamiliar environment without
acclimatization, especially adverse environment, is positively related with combat
breakdown).
Mediating variables have cognitive (interpretations of the antecedents, logical
evaluations of the situation and building expectations of behavior and situational
consequences) and dynamic quality. It is mostly controlled by the commanders, which acts
as a lens - focusing the antecedent variables into a unified interpretation of situation (as
optimal and create successful expectations).
Appraisal process is the bridge between the external conditions and soldier’s response.
Involves mental activities such as judgment, discrimination, and choice of activities, and
can be explained as soldier’s perception and evaluation of the situation and his
capabilities to cope with them. Those processes differ depending on individuals and
situations and determine the individual’ course of action in different combat stressful
situations.
Modes of responses can be physical (autonomic, musculoskeletal, and glandular
changes), emotional (affective reactions), cognitive (perception distortion, hyper alertness,
increased automatic and over learned responses) and social. They are universal, mostly
involuntary, automatic, and immediate, and just to some extent can be conditioned by
training. In this case, training needs to introduce soldiers for these reactions and
provide acceptance of them as normal body preparedness for the combat.
Modes of coping are integration of the individual appraisal and variety of response,
and can have various levels of active (preparing for combat and activities during
combat, that mostly have positive consequences and lead to optimistic reappraisal) and 
Aleksandra Dimitrovska
Explaining Combat Stress аnd its Effects on Decision Making …
10  , VOL. 12, ISSUE 2 – JUNE 2024, PP. 5-19
passive modes (inactivity, apathy or lack of initiation, which consequences of ineffective
performance to beginning of psychological collapse) to complete breakdown (combat
fatigue, battle shock, war neuroses that is manifested in removal from the battle,
immobility or unpredictable behavior). Modes of coping are voluntary, flexible and its
time of expression can be personally controlled, so those are psychological aspects that
are central target in the training. They can be influenced by training and strongly
determined by the combat situation, but in the same time give input in their reappraisal
(Jones et al., 1995).
Pavlina et al. (2000) developed another model that is based on the previous one, which
includes six aspects:
1. Battlefield-related factors – intensity and duration of combat operation, material and
manpower of attacking and defending forces, and taking care of warfare international
norms and conventions.
2. Stress prevention factors – individual (selection and classification and combat readiness
of the military personnel by the psychological preparing techniques and combat
training), unit (group cohesion and interpersonal relations) and social (family and
broader community detachment).
3. Leadership factors – proper selection and training of leaders (unit, field and senior
level);
4. Experience and appraisal of combat situation – combat stressors can be: psychological
(cognitive and emotional), physical and physiological.
5. Combat stress reactions – psychological (cognitive, emotional, and motivational),
physical and behavioral, and
6. Combat stress effects – different stages: psychological shock, immediate, acute, and
chronic.
Decision-making: aspects related to high-stress situations
The definition that is focused on psychological aspects and uncertain and complex
environments, defines the decision making as psychological process of choosing
between various alternatives with the intent of reaching maximal number of goals,
while avoiding damage and unnecessary risks and by using a minimal amount of
resources. In a stressful situation typical for the military reality, important role in the
decision making play many factors, as: the level of decision making, relevant
personality traits, dynamic life-threatening environment, uncertainty, time criticality
etc. (Heichal, 1992).
 
11
Difference in the hierarchical level of decision makers include difference in cognitive
processes that are involved, difference in available time that have consequences on the
decision making process nature and the way how it’s organized (number of people
involved, primary aim – reaction of the changing environment or planning the future,
whether the rules exist or have to be made), as well as difference in the stress effects for
various situations. The process on the tactical level is action oriented, characterized as a
reaction task, where basic problem is appropriate recognition of situation’ nature and
choosing a correct procedure, more automatically oriented (reflexive), that need splitsecond decisions, which capabilities are the base of the military training (Ranyard et al.,
1977).
At the highest level this process is cognitive and systematic, oriented to decision
making steps prescription, in which systematic process has seven steps: defining the goal,
examination of all possible alternatives, their cost and benefits review, systematic search
of new information for their evaluation, evaluation of the new information even they
contradicts to chosen alternative, repeated examination of alternatives outcomes,
making decision with finished preparations to enable its implementation (Gal, 1991).
At any moment in decision making process during emergency, several factors have
significant impact on the ability to solving complex problem in a limited time:
psychomotor skills, knowledge and attitudes, information quality and completeness,
stress generated by the actual problem or any other existing background problem, or
the complexity of elements that must be attended to.
Defining risk as a combination of probability of an unfavorable outcome of the mission
success or performance, the decision maker with risk-averse, risk-neutral, or risk-prone
attitude will make different decision in the same problem. Thus, making decisions in
stressful environment whether decisions are immediate or delayed, usually suffer from
uncertainty and imperfect information of the present. Uncertainty because of lack of
information in the scope of decision and the probability of the appearance various
results reached by making a specific decision. So, immediate decisions need more
flexibility in designing strategy and making decisions given that they are based on
imperfect knowledge, but uncertainty resolution at an early stage and no existing
difference in time of resolution and time of consequences gives possibility of decision
application in the best possible way with minimized worry time, that can be taken as
advantages (Keeney & Raiffa, 1976).
Thus, in dealing with uncertainty in a continually changing environment the decision
maker must achieve a trade-off between the cost of action vs. the risk of non-action and
Aleksandra Dimitrovska
Explaining Combat Stress аnd its Effects on Decision Making …
12  , VOL. 12, ISSUE 2 – JUNE 2024, PP. 5-19
make decisions based on available information that are many times incomplete. The
effective outcomes that achieve both kinds of judgment – analytical vs. intuitive in the
situation of emergency, given that they follow different cognitive path (Hammond,
2000).
What differ decision making during intense stress from the systematic one also is time
criticality that both with stress are subjective states, in which person feels that situation
is complex, information is incomplete, time is short, real threat exist and failure
consequences are extreme. In this case, less time is spent on alternatives identification,
negative information has bigger influence while important can be neglected, automatic
decision-making tendency is increased, and the number of mistakes can increase even
in simple situations. So, the latter performance quality inversely is related with the
quantity of decision-making stress influence, and the ability to deal depends on
decision maker subjective perception, its appraisal of the situation severity,
methodological decision-making process implementation ability, personal attitude, and
previous similar experience (Cohen, 2004). In short, the focus is on perception and
coping, which abilities upgrade are the base of the mental readiness trainings for
intense stress situations in the military.
Theoretical construct that is often used to explain the performance changes due to stress
arousal theory. There is an inverted U-shaped relationship between arousal and task
performance, so performance decreases when arousal is either too low or too high and
is optimal at intermediate level. The stress level should be high enough to stimulate top
performance, but not enough to over-stress the body, considering that performance
declines as the body moves toward exhaustion (Yerkes & Dodson, 1908).
The relationship of stress to judgment and decision making remains relatively
unexplored aspect of human behavior, so literature is limited and not always
conclusive. There are only few reliable empirical studies about stress effects on decision
making process, mostly because of the difficulties caused by the ethical limitation in
their realization, as well as enormous number of variables that have impact at the same
time and which relationships are also important. So, the results of this research are still
uncertain. Some empirical results show that combat stress reduces operational
effectiveness by different impairments on the perceptual and cognitive abilities,
influenced by the negative emotions that have negative impact on decision making,
exposed as: attention lapses, narrowing of perceptual focus, short-term memory
impairment, biased information processing etc. that will be shortly explained.
Threatening stimuli are detected more efficiently than neutral and positive one, so with
their appearance in the environment, attention is immediately focused (locked) on them
influenced by the negative emotions (as fear), while thereby quickening response time 
 
13
and neglecting other stimuli or failing other tasks. Well-known natural phenomena,
called attention tunneling or tunnel vision, occurs because of the adrenalin releasing as a
survival mechanism in danger, to prepare the body for handling a threat, which is
detrimental when other important information is ignored (Godnig, 2003).
Lower working memory capacity, specifically in case of the higher emotionality, is
related to more shooting mistakes, in case of making decision whether to shoot or not in
a dangerous environment (Kleider et al., 2010). It was shown that higher level of threat
correlated with less cognitive ability and higher feeling of resignation and helpless,
greatest negative impact on cognition have strong feelings of anger and fear, different
coping mechanism have influence on the performance in threatening situations as key
mediators, low need of rationalize action associates with better cognitive functions in
threat incidents (Wallenius et al., 2004). In the presence of threat, humans are
biologically predisposed to subconscious reactions rather than conscious thought
processing, to eliminate or reduce the imposing threat. While conscious perception
forms a representation of an environment, subconscious perception directs the actions
towards the environment and includes stimuli that do not reach conscious awareness.
But if attention that helps person to sort information needed to perform some tasks,
occurred solely on subconscious level, behavior would be difficult to take control. It
would not be an intentional and controlled process, but a reactive subconscious process
where action will be based on every aspect of environment (Gazzaniga, 2004). So,
enhancing perceptual accuracy was shown that increases with actual combat
experience, for which traditional military training was found that pays not enough
attention (Thomas et al., 2004).
Mental readiness training: Effectiveness and importance for the
military operations
To prevent operational effectiveness by reducing errors in field judgments and
performance caused by combat stress, beside the selection phase, mental readiness
training programs are developed for performance, injuries, and well-being military
personnel protection. Mental readiness approach includes connection of stress
management principles directly into meaningful training situation – giving directions
how simulations as a cost-effective model need to be used, which means making
combination of psychological coping principles with dynamic military stressful
environments. While traditional military training is aimed at skill acquisition and
retention by well known drills technique, stress training is aimed to improve stress
tolerance, or the ability to maintain effective performance in dynamic high-stress 
Aleksandra Dimitrovska
Explaining Combat Stress аnd its Effects on Decision Making …
14  , VOL. 12, ISSUE 2 – JUNE 2024, PP. 5-19
environment. In short, drills are responses that soldiers are taught to show in certain
situations. They are trained intensively and frequently and become automated
responses, so less suffer from combat stress than those that need cognitive control. But
drills as dominant or well-learned responses will only be adaptive if the situation that
triggers this response is like the situation in which the response is learned. This misses
to teach individuals in adaptive coping mechanisms or cognitive flexibility under
unpredictable adverse circumstances that are different from those in training (Delahaij
et al., 2006).
Thus, in order of effective application, stress training should be an integral part of
military training and consider the military culture, which need a mix of psychological,
operational and technical experienced trainers, as well as very hard psycho-physical
readiness of candidates. This opens some discussions about mental readiness trainers’
competences and their relationship with the military commanders. The gap and tension
that long existed between the two kinds of professionals lie in the fundamental
difference in the way which stress is perceived, as well as in the adverse stress reactions
treatment – are they medical problem and should be avoided, or it is a weapon used for
reducing will and effectiveness of the opponents.
Opposed to inappropriate approach of psychological professionals, is the fact that
military leaders are not able to manage combat/ operational stress control (prevention,
early identification, and optimal management of adverse effects) by themselves (Nash,
2006). On the other side, in order lessons to be absorbed and not failed, mental
readiness trainers need to have operational credibility with military personnel,
implicitly and explicitly to endorse these fundamental principles, as well as to be placed
in the regiment, in case to be implemented and supported by the military unit and life.
Thus, considering that mental readiness training is one of the important phases against
PTSD and maximal operational effectiveness, must not be abandoned the importance of
the military leadership as its mediating factor, as well the need of close coordination
among the two kinds of professionals, during both the training and operations
(Thompson & McCreary, 2006).
The set of psychological techniques, generally called Stress Management Training
(SMT) are used for preparing soldiers for potentially highly stressful situation in a longterm perspective, and involve relaxation, cognitive restructuring, problem solving,
social skills training, planning behavioral changes and exposure to stressful situation,
etc. SMT diminishes negative reactions to stress by upgrading personality’ capabilities
for more successful coping, that results in lowering the incidence of PTSD. According to
Murphy and Sauter (2003) SMT can have better application by dividing the
interventions in three phases: 
 
15
1. Primary, focused on changing the source of stress (or stressors) by changing
environment or etc., as a stress prevention.
2. Secondary, reducing the symptoms associated with stress before their crystallizing
into disorders, and
3. Tertiary interventions that includes treating psycho-physical disorders.
Most common are the second one, that are most related with current problems coping.
Despite SMT that is no coherent set, there are some consistent intervention programs
with strategies that are carefully selected among those who include SMT and will be
shortly explained (Ovuga, 2012).
Stress inoculation training (SIT) is set of cognitive-behavior techniques, such as
imagery and behavioral rehearsal, role play, modeling, and progressive exposure to
stressful situations, unfold in three phases:
1. Conceptualization
2. Skills acquisition and rehearsal, and
3. Application and follow through.
The aim is to help for more successful coping with the consequences of being exposed
to stressful event, by immunization through progressive exposure, as prevention. It is
an intensive multi-stage process of replacing ineffective thoughts, in order to change or
reduce maladaptive behavior in combat situations.
Stress exposure training (SET) is spreading the SIT out of its traditional clinical
application explicitly focusing on enhancing the effectiveness of operational
performance in military personnel by reducing negative responses. SET as SIT same
involve three phases:
1. Educational – discussion about typical stress reactions and identification of individual
reactions that are target of SET, by understanding and assimilating these new
experiences and upgrading their motivational level to complete the training.
2. Specific stress coping skills development, by development the stress reactions awareness
ability, as well as building cognitive, emotional and behavioral specific stressful
environment control strategies, by the trainer’s feedback.
3. Practice of new strategies in increasing stress simulation situations.
The second phase involves nine strategies, as: cognitive control techniques,
psychological control techniques, intentional overlearning of cognitive and motor skills, 
Aleksandra Dimitrovska
Explaining Combat Stress аnd its Effects on Decision Making …
 
mental practices, concurrent task development, guided error training, decision-making
training, enhancing adaptability and team training (Cannon-Bowers & Salas, 1998).
The third phase is simulation-based, that mostly correlated with real-world
environment. It has been shown that are most important and used for increasing
accuracy in high dynamic, complex and risk professions, especially for military
operations. Future research is directed to examination of mediation variables and SET
transfer principles from training to operational environment (Ross et al., 2004).
Anxiety management training, developed by Richard Suinn, is as well cognitivebehavior based, but is focused on learning relaxation and its generalization on daily
stressors. Two spots are recognized:
1. Emotional, cognitive and physical signs related to anxiety detection, and
2. Reaction to these signs on way to make them disappear.
Specific is that it is not required to find the causes of anxiety, but the focus is on its
recognition and neutralization. While, firstly was created for anxiety disorder
treatment, and later had been used wider, as well as in enhancing performance by
general stress reduction (Suinn & Richardson, 1971).
Other important aspect for stress management or improving decision making process in
high reliability professions, is efficiently coping with complex and unforeseen
situations. This topic is included in traditional training programs (focused on
enhancing cognitive control over negative stress reactions and to the question “How to
process and control”), and in some new approaches (focused on development of openness
and acceptance attitudes that helps for efficiently structure of those kind of situations,
answering the question “What to process and control”). Type of traditional training based
on Critical Thinking Instruction provides formalized questioning scheme for looking
relevant cognitive processes and representation that are used to control the though
process for managing a situation, as well as other psychological techniques, as
relaxation, biofeedback, or metacognitive techniques as cognitive restructuring and etc.
New approaches involve Thinking dispositions concept, that build executive processes
that allow effective processing of information identified as relevant, and then reflective
processes that allows relevant situation structuring, assign its meaning and build
relevant framework; and Mindfulness concept, that put accent on directing whole
attention on present experience with accepting the state of mind or avoiding as much as
possible reacting on it or judging its context, that encourage keeping in touch with
deviant elements, making relevant analysis framework and identifying appropriate
automatic reactions (Fornette et al., 2015).
 
17
CONCLUSION
Combat stress and decision making are significant aspects in the theatre of operations.
Both are based on complex psychological processes, which understanding can help in
enhancing military performance as well as are crucial in personnel mental health
protection. Current knowledge has no complete explanation of their complex nature
and interrelationship, given that research possibilities are limited. Mental readiness
training is mostly based on upgrading coping capabilities, enhancing perceptual
accuracy and cognitive restructuring for effective information processing, to minimize
negative stress effects by advancing their control. Future perspective should be directed
on implementing mental readiness training in the basic military training program as
well as on some research about maximization of the training transfer and mediating
variables discovery. This implies appropriate educated and trained mental readiness
professionals, as well as their close coordination with the military professionals and
leaders, which is conditioned by long existed gap removal. 