Machine Scheduling and Spreadsheet Modeling in a Fashion Management Class

Abstract
This paper is a result of several semesters of teaching an Operations Management class in the Fashion Management
program. Topics like flow shop and parallel machine models are traditionally discussed in an Industrial Engineering
class. However, we discussed these topics successfully in a fashion management class by providing examples that our
students could relate to. This included examples in apparel production and fashion retailing. The students were also
able to learn several logical Excel based formulas while creating spreadsheets for these topics. For the flow shop model,
we create a spreadsheet model that reflects all details of the Gantt chart including idle times. In the case of parallel
machines, the spreadsheet involves the more complex Nested IF functions. The students showed enthusiasm even
when creating the more challenging spreadsheet models.
Keywords: spreadsheet modeling; Flow shop models; Parallel machines; supply chain.
INTRODUCTION
Fashion Merchandising and Management (FMM) is the largest major in the School of
Business at Thomas Jefferson University. In addition to specialized coursework in FMM,
these majors are also required to take all the core business classes that are typically taken
by other traditional business majors. We also have several FMM majors who choose
Finance or Accounting as their minor areas of study. Such coursework prepares these
students very well when they seek full-time jobs upon graduation. While several of our
FMM students obtain jobs in the retailing industry, some of the technically inclined
students seek employment in apparel manufacturing and production. Some students
eventually start their own boutiques or related entrepreneurial ventures. Since our FMM
majors are required to take all business core courses, they are comfortable with
quantitative coursework like Business Statistics and Operations.
Microsoft Excel is the most popular software program that is widely used in the industry.
Its popularity is attributed to its unparalleled flexibility, versatility, and a wide range of 
 
21
capabilities for data management, analysis and visualization. It is used by financial
analysts, retails store managers, project managers, business analysts, accountants to name
a few. Due to the increasing use of data-driven decision making even in the retailing
sector and business in general, the demand for proficiency in Microsoft Excel has also
increased significantly in recent years. Teaching spreadsheets is not specifically about
helping students learn spreadsheets but to also help them grow to make more informed
decisions as managers in the real world. Educational theory, such as Dale Edgar’s Cone
of Experience, suggests that learners remember 70-90% of what they say and do (active
learning). Excel exercises or projects are considered as active learning (Braun, 2017).
Operations and Data Analytics is one of the core business classes which is required for all
majors in the School of Business. This course includes the coverage of important topics
like Inventory, Forecasting, Linear Programming, Supply chains, Waiting Lines, etc.
Since FMM majors take specialized courses in their field, they have a firm understanding
of concepts like Supplier Lead Time and opportunity costs (or loss of customer goodwill)
due to shortages or late shipments. For example, they know that late shipments from their
suppliers can be disastrous when the product is seasonal. This late shipment issue is
highlighted in a Harvard Business Case (Hammond & Raman, 2006) which discusses the
ski wear supply chain and the impact of late shipments in this highly seasonal business.
Flow shop and parallel machine models are topics that are traditionally found in
Industrial Engineering coursework. Some pioneering textbooks provide various methods
of scheduling (Bedworth & Bailey, 1982). Some quick and dirty manual methods have
since been presented and discussed (Woolsey, 1971, 1982, 1990). Most business students
have never visited a production unit. However, we believe that we can discuss these
topics with our fashion students by providing real-life examples as well as examples in
their field in addition to guiding them to create spreadsheet models.
We discuss two specific concepts in the classroom.
Concept 1 is about two serial processors better known as the two-machine flow shop
model. We first present a pictorial solution by drawing a Gantt chart. We then create a
spreadsheet model to reflect all aspects of the pictorial solution. To our knowledge, such
a spreadsheet solution is not found in any textbook. More importantly, the students find
this spreadsheet model easy to understand. We then ask our students to complete
Assignment 1 on three machines by providing a partial solution and some guidelines. An
important hint given is that there will be another Idle Time column that must be included
while creating the spreadsheet. 
Jaideep T. Naidu, Nioka Wyatt
Machine Scheduling and Spreadsheet Modeling in a Fashion Management Class
 
Concept 2 is about parallel (and identical) machines. Here, we review two numerical
examples in the classroom. One example is to minimize the flow time of a set of jobs on
three identical machines. The second numerical example is to sequence the jobs using the
due-date rule to calculate tardiness and number of tardy jobs. These are also solved
pictorially by drawing Gantt charts. We then create spreadsheet models that reflect the
pictorial solutions. The students are then asked to complete Assignment 2, which involves
solving a similar problem but with four machines.
For both Assignments, the students submit manual as well as spreadsheet-based
solutions.
CONCEPT 1: A 2-MACHINE FLOW SHOP MODEL
This model involves two machines (or stages). Jobs must be processed on both machines
by first going to Machine 1 (M1) and then to Machine 2 (M2). Interestingly, there is a
simple real-life example provided by Martinich (1997). We refer to it as Numerical
Example 1 and is presented below. Our fashion students relate to this model immediately
when we also refer to cutting and sewing as another example of two important stages
involved in apparel production.
Numerical Example 1
Joe has five loads of laundry to do before he can go to the beach. Based on the colors and
fabrics, he has estimated the washing and drying times for each load (Table 1). All loads
must first be washed and then dried (clothes that have been washed can sit in a basket
waiting to go to the dryer so that the washer can be used.) Determine the optimum
sequence to minimize make span and find the total completion time of all jobs.
TABLE 1
Load Washer Dryer
A
B
C
D
E
35
20
38
40
36
40
25
50
20
45
Since our main contribution is to create a spreadsheet model to closely reflect the Gannt
chart, we will not delve into Johnson’s Rule for the optimum sequence. This rule is found
in various textbooks. Using Johnson’s Rule, the optimum sequence to minimize make
span is: B – A – E – C – D. And Figure 1 below presents a Gannt chart which clearly shows
the start and end times of each job on the two machines. The Gantt chart also displays
Idle times on M2. 
 
23
FIGURE 1
M1:0 20 55 91 129 169
B A E C D
M2:0 20 45 55 95 140 190 210
B A E C D
where
represents idle time
We present a detailed Excel solution for the above example in Appendix – A. Our
spreadsheet uses Excel formulas to calculate completions times of each job on both
machines. It also calculates the Idle times on M2. Appendix – A also has Assignment 1
related to a 3-machine flow shop that the students must complete.
CONCEPT 2: PARALLEL MACHINES MODELS
Consider a set of N jobs having different processing times and a set of M identical (and
parallel) machines which can process any of these jobs. If N ≤ M, then the N jobs are
randomly assigned to one of the M machines and they get processed with no job waiting
in line. If N > M, then the first M jobs are randomly assigned to the M machines and the
remaining jobs are waiting for the next available machine to be processed. These waiting
jobs can be said to be in a queue (i.e., waiting line) and the job that is first in this queue
will go to the first available machine.
Specifically, let us consider N jobs and M machines where N > M and all the M machines
are available. The goal is to minimize the flow time. Job flow time is defined as how long
a job is in the system (i.e., from the time it entered the shop until the time it leaves the
shop after being processed).
Upon reading the above description in this section, a business major may not be clear
about what the above means or where it can be applied. Hence, we provide simple reallife examples of such scenarios. When we enter a bank during peak business hours, we
are likely to see three tellers currently serving one customer each and about five
customers waiting in a line to go to the next available teller. Interestingly, this is not only
found in banks and post-offices but also a very common sight in various apparel and
retail stores too. Numerical Example 2 given below is for 3 machines (equivalent to 3
check-out counters in a retail store). We use the first come, first served (FCFS) rule to
pictorially illustrate the mathematics of parallel machines. The spreadsheet model is
presented in Appendix B. 
Jaideep T. Naidu, Nioka Wyatt
Machine Scheduling and Spreadsheet Modeling in a Fashion Management Class
24  , VOL. 12, ISSUE 2 – JUNE 2024, PP. 20-30
Numerical Example 2
Consider three machines (M1, M2, M3) in parallel and a total of eight jobs (A, B, C, D, E,
F, G, H). The jobs and their processing times (in hours) are as given in Table 2. Consider
these to be identical parallel machines implying that the jobs can be processed on any of
the three machines.
TABLE 2
JOB A B C D E F G H
Processing Time (P) 10 20 11 21 22 50 40 60
At time t = 0, we assume that all machines are ready, and all jobs are available. Note that
while the jobs have arrived around the same time, they arrived in the order A, B, C, D, E,
F, G, and H. We use the FCFS rule since retail stores, banks, and post-offices implement
FCFS sequencing. Such a rule is fair and simple to implement.
At time t = 0: Job A (10) goes to M1; Job B (20) to M2; and Job C (11) to M3. Note that Jobs
B or C could also have gone to M1. However, the end result will still be the same in terms
of total completion time of all jobs.
Jobs A, B, C will be completed at times t = 10; t = 20; and t = 11 on M1, M2, and M3
respectively.
At time t = 10: Job D (21) goes to M1 and is completed at t = 31;
At time t = 11: Job E (22) goes to M3 and is completed at t = 33;
At time t = 20: Job F (50) goes to M2 and is completed at t = 70;
At time t = 31, Job G (40) goes to M1 and is completed at t = 71; and
At time t = 33, Job H (60) goes to M3 and is completed at t =93.
The Gantt chart (Figure 2) displays the start and end times of the eight jobs on the three
machines.
FIGURE 2
M1:0 10 31 71
A D G
M2:0 20 70
B F
M3:0 11 33 93
C E H
 
25
We present a detailed spreadsheet model for the above example in Appendix – B. This
spreadsheet model uses Excel formulas to determine which machine processes the next
job and also to calculate the completion times of each job.
Finally, we present Numerical Example 3. This example includes the due-dates of each
of the jobs and the goal is to calculate job tardiness and the number of tardy jobs.
Tardiness is an important measure of performance. Our students understand how late
shipments from suppliers can negatively impact retailers in the case of highly seasonal
products.
Numerical Example 3
Consider three machines (M1, M2, M3) in parallel and a total of eight jobs (A, B, C, D, E,
F, G, H). The jobs, their processing times (in hours) and due-dates (in hours) are as given
below in Table 3. The goal is to reduce tardiness and number of tardy jobs. Intuitively,
sequencing the jobs in non-increasing order of due-dates works well in terms of reducing
tardiness and/or the number of tardy jobs.
TABLE 3
JOB A B C D E F G H
Processing Time
(P)
10 20 11 21 22 50 40 60
Due-Date (D) 15 18 25 35 40 45 55 68
Since jobs are processed in the same order as in Example 2, the Gantt chart in Figure 3 is
same as Figure 2.
FIGURE 3
M1:0 10 31 71
A D G
M2:0 20 70
B F
M3:0 11 33 93
C E H
Since we have only eight jobs in this example, it is easy to visually see what jobs are tardy.
Note that Job A is done at t = 10 and is due only at t = 15. Hence, Job A is not tardy. Job B
is done at t = 20 but is due at t = 18. Hence, Job B is tardy and its tardiness = 20 – 18 = 2
hours. Continuing in this fashion, we note that Jobs F, G, and H are also tardy by 25, 16,
and 25 hours respectively. 
Jaideep T. Naidu, Nioka Wyatt
Machine Scheduling and Spreadsheet Modeling in a Fashion Management Class
26  , VOL. 12, ISSUE 2 – JUNE 2024, PP. 20-30
A spreadsheet model with a detailed explanation is presented in Appendix – C. This
spreadsheet goes beyond what was created in Appendix – B. So, we do not replicate what
we already did in Appendix – B. We use NESTED IF functions to calculate when each job
is completed on one of the three machines. Based on the due-date information, we use
single IF statements to calculate job tardiness and the number of tardy jobs. Appendix C
also includes Assignment 2 related to four parallel machines that the students must
complete.
MANAGERIAL ISSUES
Flow shop models: Cutting and sewing are two important stages in apparel production.
The shop floor supervisor may have to decide on worker and machine allocations on a
daily basis since there can be several customer orders with different due-dates. The
worker allocation also depends on the skillset i.e., some workers may specialize in men’s
clothing while others are experienced in cutting and sewing of women’s or children’s
clothing. When there is sudden and unanticipated demand that needs to be fulfilled, the
supervisor may have to consider overtime or hire temporary workers or rent additional
machines or outsource some of the work. These are examples of some strategies that may
need to be implemented frequently.
Parallel Machine models: As discussed earlier, we have assumed parallel machines to be
identical machines. This is equivalent to check-out counters found in several retail outlets.
The store manager must always make sure that the customer waiting lines are not very
long. This is accomplished by opening one or more additional check-out counters during
peak times and weekends. Having too many counters open is also not a good strategy. A
good manager/supervisor is always trying to strike a balance between reducing customer
wait times and minimizing the retail store’s costs. Just like in the flow shop model, adding
more machines, hiring more people, and outsourcing some work is commonly practiced.
In general, meeting customer deadlines is of utmost importance when it comes to apparel
production. In the case of seasonal products, this importance increases exponentially. The
supplier can lose a customer forever if a shipment is delayed.
CONCLUSION
Flow shop and parallel machine models typically find a place in engineering coursework.
Most operations management textbooks used by business schools do not even cover
parallel machine models. However, we have been able to successfully introduce these
topics in a traditional fashion management class. The students were able to appreciate
how these concepts are routinely used in the service industry as well as in the fashion
and apparel industry. Furthermore, drawing Gannt charts to manually solve these
problems enhances their understanding of the Math as they can visually see the entire 
 
27
process. We then focus on these pictorial solutions to create spreadsheet models which
enhance their understanding of Excel functions. Most students are then able to complete
the two Assignments by putting in some effort. In conclusion, we believe that the students
benefit from these topics because of their applications in the fashion field and also
because of their enhanced understanding of the more complex Excel functions. 